hey everyone welcome back again lasalle
montgomery here on a labor day weekend
here in the beautiful country
and for the first time since march 22nd
talking about something else besides the
history of xinjiang
i hope you all like that series an
instant classic i'm told
in the history podcasting space xinjiang
category
you know i wanted to cover today's topic
for a few reasons
first of all with some people throughout
american society
being caught on video playing fast and
loose with the covet 19 related trash
talking about
asian americans and some of the physical
and verbal assaults against
asians doesn't matter american or
otherwise that we
see on youtube tick tock and other
social media you know scrolling
through our phones well that was one
reason why i felt that
this was a timely topic the story
of what happened to vincent chen but
what really lit a fire under this one
was that
while president trump was firing away
with these loaded
substitute words for the coronavirus
vincent chen's name kept popping up here
and there
and in a few discussions with some
chinese and chinese-american friends and
colleagues
including all five who work for me well
basically
they had no idea who he was one of my
friends that i spoke to was a member of
one of the more
well-known chinese-american
organizations
and i guess also a third reason
according to the
statistics provided to me by my
long-time and wonderful iab
compliant podcast host libsyn
well more than half you are listening to
this chp episode
somewhere outside of the usa perhaps
your own country has its own
vincent chin story well this is ours
i remember the vincent chin case vividly
he was about my age four years older
and when he was killed i was one year
out of college
my history and chinese language degrees
and i was living out in l.a
self-studying chinese by reading the
international daily news
the guachiropo one of the local
chinese language papers in la you know
that i subscribed to
and i read every day to bone up on my
character recognition and this vincent
chin case was a real big deal
right at that time when i was reading
that paper
his case was front page news every day
and as a result of this multi-layered
tragedy that played out
it ended up galvanizing american
communities in 50 states
to join together to make their voices
heard
the good old-fashioned way envisioned by
the founders of the american nation
through peaceful protest and to petition
the u.s government
for a redress of grievances this story
of vincent chen went down in the summer
of 1982
in june ebony and ivory maca and stevie
wonder
and that was the top song in the u.s at
the time a few years earlier in 1979
following the iranian revolution the
whole global
oil supply chain was thrown into
disarray and the crisis was further
exacerbated by
goofs made by american energy regulators
even me
your humble narrator i too personally
queued up in those
ridiculous gas lines in solidarity with
my fellow panic buyers
to fill up my tank or get whatever the
quota of petrol was
this whole thing cost jimmy carter a
second term
reagan inherited this mess in it
dragged on for years and tough economic
times hit the usa
and the bad guy in all this was japan
all throughout the 80s
one after the other there were these
angry and
scary books published by experts and
scholars warning of
death by japan a nation that doesn't
play by the rules
and the hysteria culminated later on in
michael crichton's 1992 novel rising sun
in the
movie starring sean connery wesley
snipes and
one of my cinema heroes harvey keitel
even i remember a genuine fear about
where this was all heading for the first
time many americans wondered
if our complacency allowed these
japanese
when we weren't looking to sneak up
behind us and
kick us in the ass and nothing
symbolized this humiliation
and all the dark thoughts that
humiliation can conjure up
more than the introduction and
resounding success of japanese branded
autos
and their much better gas mileage into
the u.s
market and nobody felt it more than the
auto workers of the great state of
michigan
who worked at all the gm ford chrysler
and american motors plants there
mostly around the detroit area
some cities are built around certain
industries that become synonymous with
their names
steel production in the city of
pittsburgh or sheffield england and
detroit
that was the motor city and of course
the home of motown
you had to know about detroit in the
1940s 50s 60s and 70s
in order to fully appreciate the
magnitude of its
sudden and degrading demise beginning in
in full view of the whole world with gas
prices the way they were
that was all the incentive american
consumers needed to
look for economy over ostentatiousness
even me after so many decades i can
still recall the outrage
the sheer vilification of japan
and the news stories of angry americans
not enjoying
munching on all that humble pie one bit
shaking their fist in the direction of
tokyo thinking about all we had done for
them since 1945
and now they embarrass us like this oh
it was an angry time
reminiscent of today in some ways though
not with japan
there was quite a bit of outrage felt
but nowhere were japanese more despised
than
in detroit what their success had meant
to this city
was profound it completely changed it
mostly in the form of auto plan closures
due to drops and sales
in june of 1982 this city
once known as the paris of the midwest
well they were hurting with
17 percent unemployment
americans who felt strongly about the
matter vented in all kinds of
ugly ways but the bitter truth was
we had begun to feel too entitled
and we let our guard down and in the
1980s
we had to get up off the ground and go
out and
make america great again
vincent chin chen guaran he was born in
southern guangdong and was adopted from
an orphanage at age six by his parents
david and lily chin who at that time
were living in the detroit area
the chinese character for their surname
was the mandarin chun
david chin had served in the u.s
military in china
and ended up emigrating to the u.s after
the war
vincent came along in 1961 and the chin
family remained in detroit and that's
where vincent was raised and
spent his whole life less than a half
hour drive from the headquarters at gm
and ford
his mother worked in a laundry and his
father worked at a restaurant
which i believe he owned in other words
a pretty typical
guangdong chinese post-war first
generation urban american family
i believe lilly was working at some
brush factory
in detroit when vincent was growing up
lily chin well what is there to say
she was a real mong moo a chinese term
to
describe a mother who like mangza's mom
whatever she did
she did it for her son they didn't have
a lot of money
but she did the best for her son after a
pretty normal
1960s 1970s american upbringing
vincent went to a trade school and
became a draftsman
his sweetheart from the neighborhood was
named vicky wong
and they were all set to get married on
june 28
1982 and to celebrate the occasion
vincent and five or six of his closest
friends decided to have a bachelor party
and the thinking was to descend on some
good old-fashioned proletarian
topless bar in the neighborhood and have
themselves a saturday night
and give vincent a good send-off the
date
was june 19th 1982.
paul had just turned 40 the day before
vincent chen
was 27. and as he was getting ready to
go that night his mother
lily chin warned him not to stay out too
late and
you know he was getting married soon and
he shouldn't be going to these places
anymore
he assured his mother this was the last
time going to one of these bars
the venue vincent and his friends ended
up at was called the fancy pants club
located on woodward avenue in highland
park
a district of detroit vincent used to
live around there
the sign above the entrance touted a
promising message
all nude sexy show come and see
well vincent and his friends went in and
sat down near the stage and like people
do with these kind of joints
they all got nice and liquored up
and the dancers would come over and
shake it a few times
for tips and after a while a couple men
entered the club
one was a chrysler plant supervisor
named ronald evans
and the other was a stepson michael nitz
they sat down near vincent's table and
started to
join in the atmosphere for this
demographic
in this neighborhood these kinds of
strip clubs and
topless bars were very common places to
retire to after putting in your eight
hour shift at the auto plant
if you were management maybe you went to
a country club or
more upscale kind of joint but if you
were rank and file
and punched a clock and these were the
places
detroit had a ton of them and a quick
drive across the detroit river over in
windsor canada
they had a whole other thing going on
well ronald evans
i guess you could say up to this moment
on june 19
1982 the evening that his life went off
the rails
well he was good people no stranger to
the
occasional bar room brawl maybe a little
strong-minded or opinionated
people might have been a little reserved
around him
or watched what they said but certainly
he wasn't what you'd call a killer his
recently laid off stepson too
michael nitz pretty normal detroit
peoples
but vincent chin and ronald eben's lives
collided
suddenly after vincent had just finished
a lap dance with some girl
and i don't know he said something maybe
ingest who knows that
in so many words inferred that you know
this dancer
wasn't so good at her job and ronald
evans who was close by
well he said something maybe also in
jest
inebriated men doing their trash talk
beating their chess
the essence of what ebens had said was
that vincent
didn't know what he was talking about
the f word was used somewhere
in the back and forth which in these
situations always throws another log in
the fire
what else what else was muttered quietly
but just loud enough to be heard or
something said but not vocalized or
inferred with body language who knows
whatever it was or wasn't vincent knew
it when he heard it
or thought he knew what it was despite
his friends trying to cool him down he
got up
and approached ron evans at his table
more angry words were exchanged and
out of nowhere vincent smacked him boom
ebens would later call it a sucker punch
when he wasn't looking or
expecting it well this predictably led
to a melee in front of the stage and in
the heat of the moment
michael nitz got hit with a chair and
was all bloodied and the whole thing was
broken up
just as fast as it began and let me just
say it's not like this kind of thing
didn't happen all the time in
bars across the entirety of the u.s of a
nobody got it on tape but supposedly ron
evans made some remark about asians
or japanese being these mf's who were
taking away all their jobs and all this
unemployment was due to them
americans yelled these same accusations
back in the 1870s about chinese
now a hundred years later they were
saying the same thing about the japanese
or just asian americans in general maybe
a
racist comment was made maybe not
witnesses said they heard it loud and
clear
certainly later on in the night after
things had taken a violent turn
he'd been let loose with more than a few
ethnic slurs
after the violence had subsided and
everyone went back to their corners
vincent and his friends gathered their
stuff and left
one of them came back into the fancy
pants club and
went to ron eben's table and tried to do
some diplomacy
apologize and whatnot and explain the
situation but
the heat was turned up way too high
still so he went back outside the fancy
pants to
meet up with vincent in the group and
when ronald evans and michael nitz
decided they had had enough
they got up and left too and went to
their car
vincent and his friends were still in
the parking lot and a couple of drunk
men
hellbent on putting each other in their
respective places
they went at it vincent asked him if he
wanted to finish this fight
right here and now ron evans
went to his car opened the trunk and
took out a baseball bat
as soon as he saw that vincent knew he
was in trouble
and told ebens if he wanted to fight
fine but lose the bat
evans rushed him and i'm guessing
vincent took one look in even's eyes
knew he better turn and run for his life
he and his buddy jimmy chu they bolted
and eben's tried to grab them but
they ran away and quickly thereafter he
gave up the chase and
went back to his car one bystander who
had been in the club was
approached by evans to help hunt down
those two
evans paid him 20 bucks for his effort
then
nits got behind the wheel of their car
and together with ebens they gave chase
they drove around the vicinity trying to
hunt vinson down
even's still hot from that altercation
with vincent
still completely unable to control his
rage
and then he saw him vincent and his pal
jimmy choo
they were only a couple blocks or so
away from the fancy pants
outside of mcdonald's and evens will
recall that
as he did a drive-by vincent saw him and
taunted him from afar
and evens he just saw red
and told nits to pull into the mickey
d's where vincent and his friend were
as soon as nitz put the car in park
evans grabbed the bat and went after
vincent
vincent bolted down the street but evans
caught up with him
and started wailing on him with his bat
and even after vincent had
crawled out into the middle of the
street and was beaten unconscious
even still kept hitting him with that
bat
an off-duty cop saw the whole thing had
to draw his gun to disarm eben's
and vincent well he wasn't dead yet but
he may as well have been
a strapping man a middle age swinging a
jackie robinson louisville slugger with
the full force of an enraged human being
and he knew what he was doing
they took vincent to henry ford hospital
and he was hooked up to life support
i'm sure among the annals of amazing
neurosurgeons and emergency room
comebacks there have been patients who
survived wounds as traumatic as
vincent's
but there was no miracle that night for
vincent chen
after four days of agony lily chin
whose husband david had just passed away
six months earlier
she had to resign herself to the
unthinkable
vincent was taken off a life support
passed away on june 24
1982 his funeral was held on june 28th
the day he and vicki were supposed to
have been married
so you could imagine the magnitude of
this tragedy
think of lily chin six months a widow
and now she loses
her only son her only child
well it was pretty cut and dried ronald
evans knew
he was gonna have to do a long hard
stretch for this
plenty of witnesses including an
off-duty cop the blood of
vincent chin on the weapon he was
holding no matter one's true intentions
or
state of mind at the time this was going
to be a
tough one to prove innocence
well as far as what ended up happening
to ronald evans who
beat vincent to death with that
louisville slugger and michael nitz who
held vincent down
well i'm not going to get into it but
now the american legal system
great as it is sometimes
isn't such a thing of beauty in the
manner in which it operates in real life
a plea bargain agreement was reached
between the attorneys which whittled the
charges down from second-degree murder
to manslaughter the unlawful killing of
a human being
without malice a forethought when this
whole thing started well ronald evans
hadn't meant to kill vincent you know
things happen everything should have
been taken into perspective
ron and michael they pled guilty to
manslaughter
did they have the intent to kill vincent
well i guess you could say they
did try and hunt vinson down with the
intent to do him harm
not kill him perhaps but some kind of
harm or just intimidate him if they
could
and teach him a lesson the way some
people feel duty bound to do
in order to assuage their anger or
avenge some wrong committed against them
anyway the charges were manslaughter and
evens and nits appeared before judge
charles kaufman of the wayne county
circuit court
and they were looking at 15 years in
prison
and that's what the asian community and
other supporters of vincent chen were
expecting
now all things considered that is it
wasn't like the jfk assassination with
so many unanswered questions no grassy
knolls
i mean this one was conveniently
an open and shut case judge kaufman
gave the two men a three-year suspended
sentence a three thousand dollar fine
each
plus they had to pay various other court
costs
a suspended sentence a sentence of
imprisonment evens and nits didn't have
to serve
as long as they didn't commit any
further crimes during this
three-year period that's even better
than house arrest and i guess in some
ways this is where the
next part of the story begins you know
not only amongst asian americans but
with other minority communities as well
they sounded off about this whole matter
and i can summarize it all by saying
well they strongly questioned judge
kaufman's decision
what was that all about what an
insulting decision
well till his dying day in 2004
judge kaufman never backpedaled on his
decision
the way he saw it these two guys ron
evans and michael nitz
they were good people no criminal record
and both had quote
stable working backgrounds gee
so did vincent chen when asked why he
didn't allow for more careful
examination of the evidence and other
things he chose to ignore
kaufman had said he had to rule on 50
sentences a week
200 a month and 2 000 a year and no one
had the time
and resources to subpoena the witnesses
who saw everything
kaufman was sort of indignant that his
accusers couldn't see that in this legal
system
the way it operated at this level you
had to churn them and burn them
no time to do deep dives on every case
judge kaufman didn't
need to hear the other side of the story
he already listened to everything ebens
and nitz's attorney told him and
that was everything he needed to know
vincent had started it nuff said
the most memorable line associated with
judge kaufman's decision was when he
said in an interview
quote i just don't think that putting
them in prison would do any good for
them
or society you don't make the punishment
fit the crime
you make the punishment fit the criminal
and that was that so i guess you could
say ronald evans and michael nitz were
pretty relieved to beat that rap
they didn't have to do any hard time in
the slammer
the only problem for them was that their
nightmare was only entering a new phase
as i said i was living in l.a at the
time and reading these
chinese newspapers every day the story
of what had happened in detroit with the
vincent chin case became national news
in the u.s
however the story yeah sort of came and
went but not in the chinese press
his front page every day and because i
was living in l.a
the local news in the chinese community
was dominated by the
colorful future mayor of monterey park
from 1983
to 84 lilly lee chun don't confuse her
with vincent's mother lily chin
this is lily lee chun today a very close
friend of mine and
mentor she was one of the leaders on the
west coast to send the
call out to begin to organize asian
americans
she had already achieved some success
with the asian pacific human services
program she had championed
working at the county of l.a besides
lilly
another major force here on the west
coast who stepped forward
was stuart koi he had been lily's first
volunteer for her social services
program
and lily also got stuart involved with
chinatown service center
and later on she became the one who
suggested he
also organized some kind of organization
to provide legal services
to asian americans and pacific islanders
he was in los a stewart was at law
school in ucla at the time
and this is where stuart koi co-founded
the asia pacific american legal center
in southern california in 1982 and this
organization
provided legal aid and other forms of
support to asian americans and
pacific islanders he's a very respected
and
revered figure in the la community i've
had the pleasure to have met him a
couple times
so this all started with the vincent
chin case
and over in detroit was helen zia
well she wasn't from there she was from
jersey but that's where she was living
in 1982 working as a journalist she and
fellow organizer and activist
liza chan helped the bereaved and
befuddled
lily chin and her long quest for justice
you know lily chin didn't have any fancy
college degrees and just barely spoke
english but
she had a lot to say and for the next
several years
throughout this ordeal helen zia and
liza chan
looked after her and were lilly's
spokespersons
well u.s bill of rights fifth amendment
you know how it goes
no person shall be subject for the same
offense or twice be put in jeopardy of
life or limb
no matter what ronald evans and michael
nitz
they were off the hook they couldn't be
tried again for the killing of vincent
chin
but if they could get someone in the
united states department of justice to
take a look at this
if the evidence was there these two guys
could be charged in a federal court
for a civil rights violation well i
don't want to say that prior to vincent
chen's killing there were no
pan-asian-american organizations in the
u.s
but following judge kaufman's decision
that
really was the moment where
asian-americans not just chinese
you know who were mainly carrying the
standard in this battle
they all learned the importance of
coalition building and joining their
numbers so that they could
collectively engage the american
political process
my friend lilly lee chen who at the time
had just become the first
chinese-american woman
to lead a city as mayor well she was a
major proponent of building bridges with
all communities not just amongst asian
americans
following vincent chin's death and
subsequent trial
asian americans in the early 1980s were
energized
and ready to stand up and stop trying to
lay low and not rock the boat
many for the first time woke up to a new
political consciousness
this was a pretty cut and dried case of
manslaughter some would say murder but
clearly at least manslaughter but as far
as a racially motivated case
that wasn't so evident maybe was maybe
wasn't i guess it all depends
how you felt about it following
kaufman's decision
community leaders in both detroit and in
other cities
started protesting demonstrating and
writing their representatives in
government
demanding justice for vincent chin on
march 30th
1983 american citizens for justice was
formed in detroit
and they led the fight to demand a
retrial this coalition of asian
americans crossed their ethnic
boundaries and
shared resources energy and
determination
not to go quietly and accept what had
just happened
in judge charles kaufman's courtroom
i know it's kind of shocking and
uncomfortable for many to see the
divisions in our american society today
all throughout 1983 the matter of race
was also being argued
as it related to the vincent chin case
they were demonstrators in exhibitions
of peaceful
public outrage and ron ebens and michael
nitz and their families
they were carried away with the stormy
aftermath of their good fortune
following judge kaufman's decision their
lives
were essentially ruined it's not like
the whole community stood with the asian
american civil rights protesters
ron ebins had plenty of supporters
there were plenty of locals who saw
nothing wrong in the kaufman decision
and they were more than happy to hit the
streets and launch their own counter
protests
you can bet some of the talk that got
passed around that was used to
smear the protesters their intentions
motives and whatnot
yeah was laced with plenty of well-worn
inferences to their
asian ethnic origins needless to say
society was quite divided with some
places being more divided than others
and as far as asian americans
at this time in us history in detroit
as i said emotions ran hot
and it didn't matter that vincent wasn't
japanese and that he had
nothing to do with michael nitz losing
his job or
any other detroit auto worker the way
more than a few angry unemployed workers
saw it
vincent was just a symbol for all asians
so vincent's case went from being about
a drunken brawl
going awry to a civil rights case now
getting national exposure on the evening
news
organizers from coast to coast reached
out to the media and
gave this moment maximum coverage
helen zia was behind a microphone
constantly in her
role as the chief spokesperson of the
movement
to evens and nits she was their worst
antagonizer
there was also a justice for vincent
chen national campaign
and big guns in the black community such
as jesse jackson
also lent their support and spoke out
for justice
on and off whenever the case was in the
news it was sensationalized at times
and whether this helped or hurt in
vincent's posthumous quest for justice
it's hard to say well 1984
the case went to federal court thiebens
and
nitz's attorneys had strongly argued
that this case had nothing to do with
civil rights
or racism or anything like that and
evens and knits
were not racists and everyone who knew
them would attest to that
vincent had the dubious honor to become
the first asian american whose case
was prosecuted under the 1964 civil
rights act
signed under lbj evens and nits
face charges of conspiracy to violate
the civil rights of vincent chin
and if convicted in this federal court
they were looking at a possible sentence
of life in prison
12 jurors would listen to the arguments
and decide and when it was all over
nitz was found not guilty on two counts
but ronald evans
was found guilty on one of the charges
against him and sentenced to 25 years in
prison
the case was appealed at once and then
finally on may 1st
1987 almost five years after vincent's
tragic end
the case was decided once and for all
the venue of the trial had been changed
to cincinnati
there ronald evans was certain to get a
more
sympathetic jury far removed from the
emotions that had
wracked the motor city since the judge
kaufman decision
and the federal appellate court in the
end
found eben's not guilty their decision
had been that
this was not a racially motivated crime
well ronald evans finally beat this rap
the courts had spoken
there were no other avenues open to
prosecute him for this crime
on march 23rd 1987 a civil suit brought
against ebons and nits was settled out
of court
nits had to pay lily chin fifty thousand
dollars and thirty dollar weekly
installments over 10 years
the judgment against ebons was
understandably a little bit more stiff
he was ordered to pay one and a half
million dollars at the rate of two
hundred dollars per month
for the first two years and 25 percent
of his income or 200
per month thereafter whatever was the
larger amount
well even's made some payments but he
fell behind as the
whirlwind he was caught up in had led
him from one
low-paying job to the next losing his
happy family life and
finally moving to nevada where he had a
better chance of hiding behind the law
to protect his assets
which were meager indeed helen zia
continued to stand by lily chin's side
and
did not allow ebens to seek relief from
the courts to try and
escape from his legal and financial
predicament
the amount he owes now is something like
over 8 million dollars of principle and
interest
in a june 2012 telephone interview
something evens rarely ever did
he said about the vincent chen case that
it was quote
the only wrong thing he had ever done in
his life
end quote he never had to serve a prison
sentence
for what he did to vincent chen but
ronald evans ended up paying for his
mistake in
other ways like i said this isn't just a
story about vincent chen
being denied justice it's also about the
organized political awakening that
happened amongst asian americans
what happened to vincent chin became a
rallying cry whenever asian americans
were wrongly accused or were victimized
by the
american judicial system i don't know
how many organizations there are today
that have
sprung up coast to coast but there's a
lot and i've met members from
a few of them over the years and another
consequence of
vincent's case was that what followed
throughout the 1980s and into the 1990s
was more federal protections and
services to asian americans and legally
recognizing them as a minority
here in los angeles steward quotes asian
americans advancing justice
continues to advocate for all asian
americans native hawaiians and pacific
islanders
helen zia has written many great books
and has spoken to
so many public forums and created so
much awareness
about this case and other issues you
know related to other topics
i saw her a few years ago in dc at a
united chinese americans conference
great speaker
i'll have links to several uh resources
in the show notes
stewart koi had summed it up well when
he said quote
in the specific case of vincent chin the
final outcome repeated the tragedy of
his murder
but the case and the intense mobilizing
it precipitated
set in motion forces that have been
gathering in strength every year since
then
end quote you know the sadness felt by
so many people about
vincent chin's death at such a young age
only 27
and being denied justice not once but
twice
well that was tragic enough but
but you know the final tragedy in the
whole story of vincent chen was in june
of 2002
when his mother lily died of cancer in a
farmington hills michigan hospital
when she was going through all the
treatment and
suffering so well she didn't have her
son there to comfort her
and when she passed there was no son who
survived her to mourn her death
and the generations that perhaps might
have followed vincent and vicki's
marriage on june 28
1982 well these future generations who
never were
they too were part of this sad story
so at a time when many american
communities from coast to coast are
united
in the black lives matter movement i
wanted to mention that
asian americans also had their own
george perry floyd jr
and when the law failed their community
in the early 1980s
back when they were only one and a half
percent of the population
a new movement was born following
vincent chin's death
the nation's discourse about civil
rights
made some room for the aapi community
nation americans and
pacific islanders racism
wasn't just a black and white thing as
popularly believed
it came in other colors one more thing
filmmakers christine choi
and rene tajima pena came out with a
documentary released in 1989 that
won a bunch of awards got nominated for
an oscar too
it's called who killed vincent chin you
could see it or
rent it at all kinds of uh online
streaming services i think there's
one or two floating around youtube all
right let's close up shop for now a
little morsel
of chinese american history for you i
like to do this from time to time
may i make one more appeal if you'd like
to support me and my
humble efforts to get all this good
stuff out there to the whole english
speaking world
how about going to patreon.com china
history podcast and signing up for less
than the price of a double-double at
in-n-out
just the burger not the combo you can
help me to keep this effort of mine
going
you don't like patreon i also keep a
begging bowl
24 7 at paypal dot me
slash china history podcast all links at
the show notes at tcup.media
okay enough of this panhandling laszlo
montgomery here
signing off once again from the city of
los angeles here in the golden state
hoping you'll join me next time for
another exciting episode
of the china history podcast